docs: add variables; rework scope (#11062)
NixOS/nix: doc/manual/src/language/scope.md

# Scoping rules

A *scope* in the Nix language is a dictionary keyed by [name](./identifiers.md#names), mapping each name to an expression and a *definition type*.
The definition type is either *explicit* or *implicit*.
Each entry in this dictionary is a *definition*.

Explicit definitions are created by the following expressions:
- [let-expressions](syntax.md#let-expressions)
- [recursive attribute set literals](syntax.md#recursive-sets) (`rec`)
- [function literals](syntax.md#functions)

Implicit definitions are only created by [with-expressions](./syntax.md#with-expressions).

Every expression is *enclosed* by a scope.
The outermost expression is enclosed by the [built-in, global scope](./builtins.md), which contains only explicit definitions.

> The respective definition types *extend* their enclosing scope by adding new definitions, or replacing existing ones with the same name.

Author: ```suggestion
The expressions listed above *extend* their enclosing scope by adding new definitions, or replacing existing ones with the same name.
```

Having just defined ‘definition types’ to mean the set {implicit, explicit}, I don't think it should be used in this sentence.

# Scoping rules

> A _scope_ in the Nix language is an [identifier]-keyed dictionary, mapping each identifier to an expression and a _definition type_.

Author: Ooh, good catch!

> The definition type is either _explicit_ or _implicit_.

Author: I don't understand what you're proposing here. If you meant to mark this line, what alternative would you propose for listing definition types, and where is ‘in place’?

> The definition type is either _explicit_ or _implicit_.

Reviewer: I would just list the definition types directly without classifying them into explicit and implicit, and explain the semantics of each in their own respective section/page.

> The definition type is either _explicit_ or _implicit_.

Author: Hm. Perhaps I've written this confusingly.

The thing this paragraph is trying to express is that we have (conceptually):
```cpp
enum DefinitionType { Implicit, Explicit };
using Scope = std::map<Name, std::pair<Expr, DefinitionType>>;
```

It happens to be the case that the expressions that extend scopes can be classified into implicit and explicit, but that doesn't matter for purposes of defining what data a scope contains. A hypothetical Nix language extension could allow let-expressions to create both implicit and explicit definitions, for example:
```nix
let
  a = 1;
  implicit b = 2;
in ...
```

But there is a meaningful difference between the scopes $\\{ \texttt{\"a\"} \mapsto (1, \mathit{implicit}) \\}$ and $\\{ \texttt{"a"} \mapsto (1, \mathit{explicit}) \\}$; the difference is revealed by the fact that `with { a = 2; }; a` evaluates to 2 in the former scope and 1 in the latter. So the difference should be explained in the description of what a scope is.

The previous version of this documentation achieved this goal by partitioning scopes into primary and secondary maps, like so:
```cpp
struct Scope {
  std::map<Name, Expr> primary;
  std::map<Name, Expr> secondary;
}
```

This is isomorphic to the other `Scope` type, but when I tried explaining the concepts ‘primary’ and ‘secondary’, I noticed that they don't really connect to the language we naturally use to describe the special behavior of definitions created by `with`. We naturally describe those definitions as implicit, so I thought it would be easier to understand if I took the implicit/explicit distinction and applied it directly to definitions (map entries) in scopes.

> The definition type is either _explicit_ or _implicit_.

Reviewer: I understood what you were trying to achieve, but I think it front-loads a lot of complexity. IMO we have to design the manual for incremental reading, and putting too much operational detail into an overview will just destroy reader's motivation to plow through the rest. Therefore I'm suggesting working out the details in the respective definition types, and e.g. be appropriately more diligent when describing the semantics of `with`.

> The definition type is either _explicit_ or _implicit_.

Author: I was thinking of this as a specification of what ‘scope’ means, not an overview.

There should be, somewhere, a reference-level specification of what a scope is, so that other places in the language reference can link to that when scopes are mentioned.

If not here, where should that specification go?

> The definition type is either _explicit_ or _implicit_.

Reviewer: I gave it another thought, and yes, that's probably the best way to do it. Thanks for the productive discussion and sorry for the delay.

Each entry in this dictionary is a _definition_.

[identifier]: identifiers.md

Explicit definitions are created by the following expressions:
  * [let-expressions](syntax.md#let-expressions)
  * [recursive attribute set literals](syntax.md#recursive-sets) (`rec`)
  * [function literals](syntax.md#functions)

Implicit definitions are only created by [with-expressions].

[with-expressions]: syntax.md#with-expressions

Each of the above expressions defines which of its subexpressions are _enclosed_ by the extended scope.
The outermost expression of a Nix language file is enclosed by the [global scope], which contains only explicit definitions.

> Nix is [statically scoped]; the enclosing scope of an expression is always determined only by the expressions that contain it as a subexpression, and not by the context in which it is evaluated.

Author: Have I made this better?
